AWS Patches Undocumented APIs Bypassing CloudTrail Event Logging
DevOps
QCon London (March 27-29, 2023): Adopt the right emerging trends to solve your engineering challenges.
AWS Patches Undocumented APIs Bypassing CloudTrail Event Logging
Like
Print
Bookmarks
Feb 04, 2023
2
min read
by
Renato Losio
Write for InfoQ Join a community of experts. Increase your visibility.
Grow your career.Learn more
AWS recently patched undocumented IAM APIs that bypassed CloudTrail logging. The vulnerability allowed a malicious user to perform reconnaissance activities on IAM without recording events in CloudTrail or being detected by Amazon GuardDuty.
Last year the security research team at Datadog identified a subset of undocumented IAM API requests that were not logged in CloudTrail, the managed service enabling governance, compliance, operational auditing, and risk auditing on AWS. Nick Frichette, senior security researcher at Datadog, explains:
Being able to bypass CloudTrail logging and getting the results of those calls has serious implications for defenders because it limits their ability to track what an adversary has done in an environment and what actions they have taken. Furthermore, this technique also makes it possible to bypass GuardDuty for findings such as IAMUser/AnomalousBehavior, because GuardDuty uses CloudTrail as a data source, and it cannot alert on something it cannot see.
The issue impacted third-party tools and platforms that depend on CloudTrail logs to monitor account activity, including Datadog itself. Frichette describes how the vulnerability was detected:
A straightforward (albeit slow) way to find undocumented APIs is to monitor network traffic in a web browser’s developer tools. (...) By monitoring this activity, you may notice API calls to unusual or undocumented services. While using the AWS Console, we noticed several requests to a service called iamadmin.
Source: https://securitylabs.datadoghq.com/articles/iamadmin-cloudtrail-bypass/
Undocumented APIs are an important focus in cloud security: security researchers at Rhino Security Labs recently identified an undocumented API for AWS CodeStar that could be used to escalate privileges in an AWS account. In a "Blind Spots in the Cloud" article, Spencer Gietzen, cloud security researcher at CrowdStrike, suggests:
To prevent undocumented APIs from being used maliciously in your environment, it is important to grant permissions on a granular level. That means: Do not grant permissions using wildcards (such as using a * in AWS), and do not use managed permissions sets, as they are often overly permissive.
Radware's latest State of API Security Survey suggests that the threat of undocumented APIs is underestimated:
62% of those surveyed admit a third or more of APIs are undocumented.
According to the disclosure timeline provided by Datadog, researchers report the issue to AWS in March 2022 and AWS worked for many months on different internal changes to align the CloudTrail logging and fix the iamadmin calls. While some users question the long disclosure timeline, user synackk comments on Reddit:
A logging bypass on a read-only API is also not an omega bad exploit that requires all hands on deck to fix. The iamadmin APIs still required authentication and authorization to use.
AWS has not made any public statement regarding the vulnerability or its resolution.
About the Author
Renato Losio
Show moreShow less
Inspired by this content? Write for InfoQ.
Becoming an editor for InfoQ was one of the best decisions of my career. It has challenged me and helped me grow in so many ways. We'd love to have more people join our team.
Thomas BettsLead Editor, Software Architecture and Design @InfoQ; Senior Principal Engineer
Write for InfoQ
Rate this Article
Adoption
Style
Author Contacted
This content is in the DevOps topic
Related Topics:
Architecture & Design
DevOps
AWS
Cloud Security
Amazon
Security Vulnerabilities
Security
AWS CloudTrail
Cloud Computing
Cloud
Related Editorial
Related Sponsored Content
[eBook] Understanding Kubernetes (Updated Edition)
Related Sponsor
Akamai Cloud Computing based on Linode. A developer-friendly and massively-distributed platform to build, run, and secure cloud workloads. Start a free trial today.
Related Content
Infrastructure from Code: the New Wave of Cloud Infrastructure Management
Slack's Lessons Learned from Supporting Highly Regulated Workloads on AWS GovCloud
AWS OpenSearch Serverless Now Generally Available
AWS Gives Developers More Control over Lambda Function Runtime with Runtime Management Controls
AWS Lambda Now Supports Maximum Concurrency for SQS as Event Source
Google Delivers Comprehensive Cloud Infrastructure Reliability Guide
Log Analytics Feature in Cloud Logging Now Generally Available
AWS Releases SimSpace Weaver for Real-Time Spatial Simulations
How to Test Your Fault Isolation Boundaries in the Cloud
Pump It Up! Actually Gaining Benefit from Cloud Native Microservices
Colliding Communities, Cloud Native, and Telecommunications Standards
CloudFormation or Terraform: Which Iac Platform is the Best Fit for You?
The Journey to API Management on the Cloud
Securing APIs and Microservices in the Cloud
Building Workflows with AWS Step Functions
How to Migrate an Oracle Database to MySQL Using AWS Database Migration Service
Choosing the Right Cloud Infrastructure for Your SaaS Start-up
Building Applications from Edge to Cloud
Cloud Native Network Functions Are Here
Software Security Report Finds JavaScript Applications Have Fewer Flaws Than Java and .NET
Terraform Cloud Adds Dynamic Provider Credentials and OPA Support
Kubefirst Platform Improves Local Experience and Password Management
Google Boosts Sandboxed Container File System Performance by Improving gVisor
Optimized Reads and Optimized Writes Improve Amazon RDS Performances for MySQL Compatible Engines
GCP Adds Simplified Operator for Connecting Google Kubernetes Engine to Cloud SQL
Kubernetes Report Finds Increase in Poorly Configured Workloads
Amazon Athena Now Supports Apache Spark Engine
Containers and Serverless—Rivals or Cohorts?
Lambda Throttling - How to Avoid It?
Sigstore Releases Python Client
Critical Control Web Panel Vulnerability Still Under Exploit Months After Patch Available
Cloudflare DDoS Report Finds Increase in Attack Volume and Duration
Amazon S3 Encrypts All New Objects with AES-256
Data Protection Methods for Federal Organizations and beyond
Using Serverless WebSockets to Enable Real-Time Messaging
API Security: from Defense-in-Depth (DiD) to Zero Trust
What Does Zero Trust Mean for Kubernetes?
Successfully Integrating Dynamic Security Testing into Your CI/CD Pipeline
Git 2.39.1 Fixes Two Critical Remote Code Execution Vulnerabilities
Unskilled Cybercriminals May Be Leveraging ChatGPT to Create Malware
The InfoQ Newsletter
A round-up of last week’s content on InfoQ sent out every Tuesday. Join a community of over 250,000 senior developers.
View an example
Enter your e-mail address
Select your country
Select a country
I consent to InfoQ.com handling my data as explained in this Privacy Notice.
We protect your privacy.
Hello stranger!
You need to Register an InfoQ account or
Login or login to post comments. But there's so much more behind being registered.
Get the most out of the InfoQ experience.
Tell us what you think
Allowed html: a,b,br,blockquote,i,li,pre,u,ul,p
Email me replies to any of my messages in this thread
Community comments
Watch thread
Close
Your Reply
Quote original message
Allowed html: a,b,br,blockquote,i,li,pre,u,ul,p
Email me replies to any of my messages in this thread
Cancel
Close
Your Reply
Allowed html: a,b,br,blockquote,i,li,pre,u,ul,p
Email me replies to any of my messages in this thread
Cancel
Close
OK
Discuss
Development
Farewell to Subversion: GitHub Sunsets Support After 13 Years
Go 1.20 Improves Compiler Performance and Extends Coverage Support
Designing for Concurrency: the Hilbert’s Hotel Problem in Go
Architecture & Design
Avoid Being an "Ivory Tower" Architect: the Relationship between Architects and Their Organisation
Expanding GraphQL Federation at Netflix with Tejas Shikhare
No Next Next: Fighting Entropy in Your Microservices Architecture
Culture & Methods
There and Back Again: Our Rust Adoption Journey
Secure Delivery: Better Workflows for Secure Systems and Pain-Free Delivery
How to Analyze Behavior and Influence Behavior Change with the ABC Model
AI, ML & Data Engineering
Data Versioning at Scale: Chaos and Chaos Management
Understanding and Debugging Deep Learning Models: Exploring AI Interpretability Methods
OpenAI Releases an Advanced Classifier to Distinguish AI and Human Writing Styles
DevOps
Service Mesh Kuma Improves Policy Handling and Debugging Experience
Grafana Tempo Introduces New Query Language and Support for Apache Parquet
Hard-Won Lessons from the Trenches: Failure Modes of Platform Engineering — And How to Avoid Them
