in a column like this is immediately being labelled a 'bhakt'. Sure, one should criticise shortcomings of a government or its policies. However, should praise not be given when it is due? The recently announced budget for FY23-24 was indeed the best budget of all the nine annual budgets presented by the current government so far. In five areas in particular the government deserves genuine praise.
Fiscal prudence
This was the last budget the government would present before getting into full-blown 2024 Lok Sabha election mode. It is exactly these pre-election- year budgets that in the past have been used to issue sops, subsidies and freebies to get votes. Indeed it is so normal to have sop-friendly pre-election budgets that budget analysts expected the same this time too. The TV experts would have pre-prepared such post-budget statements as, 'Fiscal responsibility was not shown, but one can understand, given it is an election year."
However, the current budget, not only leading into elections but also coming out of a Covid battered economy, is one of the most fiscally prudent budgets in recent times. Fiscal deficit, a measure of how much more the government spends than it earns (hence a low number is better), was targeted at 5.9% of GDP, compared to 6.7% just two years ago and the government aims to bring the deficit to 4.5% by FY25-26.
These numbers ultimately impact all Indians. Because if the government spends too much, it can lead
higher productivity and economic growth.
Cutting subsidies substantially
When was the last time you heard a government cut- ting subsidies in a big manner, and that too right before an election year? And yet, food, fertiliser, petroleum and other subsidies are set to drop (yes, not rise) from Rs 5.6 lakh crore to Rs 4.0 lakh crore, a drop of 28% in one year.
Disinvestments
For years disinvestment targets were set only to be never met. In the past year, disinvestment reached 77% of the target, or Rs 50,000 crore instead of the expected Rs 65,000 crore. This is substantial and the government managed to sell the cash-burning albatross Air India in the middle of a pandemic.
to inflation and an overall weak economy.
Spending massively on infrastructure
Make no mistake, the government spends a lot of money. A lot of this spend, also known as revenue expenditure, simply goes into running it on a daily basis. However, it is the government investment for the long term in the form of capital expenditures that leads to future returns. Infrastructure (roads, rail, bridges, ports, airports) is a big part of this.
The government's capital expenditures will rise this year from Rs 7.2 lakh crore to Rs 10 lakh crore, a rise of 37% in one year, nearly doubling from three years ago. Railways ministry expenditure alone will rise from Rs 1.6 lakh crore to 2.4 lakh crore, a rise of 48% in one year. These aren't token increases, but radical shifts towards emphasising the infrastructure buildout for the nation, which will not only produce jobs right away but more importantly show long-term rewards of
Tax cuts for the middle-income earners
This is where the government finds a lot of suppor ters. Income tax levels had not changed for the past few years, and given inflation alone, a correction was overdue. Income tax at more reasonable levels will not only give relief, but also increase compliance. Similarly, reducing the effective marginal tax rate for super-high income earners (Rs 5 crore plus annually) will also make us more competitive globally.
There are other aspects of the budget too, including various government schemes, smaller welfare measures and some policy changes that will all help India get more streamlined as a globally competitive economy: There were the usual duties, taxes and other tweaks, making certain products cheaper or more expensive. However, there were no major surprises, either good or bad, which is exactly how the budget of a big, stable economy should be. As the Indian economy becomes larger, and we aspire to be even bigger, we need to continue having budgets that are fiscally responsible, invest in future growth and offer stability.
